Teacher: Good morning everyone! Today we're going to continue our discussion about ecosystems and how living things interact with their environment.
Teacher: Before we start, can anyone remind me what we learned last week about food chains?
Student 1: Um, we learned that energy goes from plants to animals that eat them, and then to predators.
Teacher: Exactly right, Maria! Energy flows through the food chain. Today we'll build on that concept and look at food webs.
Teacher: A food web is more complex than a simple chain. Instead of one path, we have many interconnected paths. Let me draw this on the board.
Teacher: So here we have our producers - the plants. And then we have multiple consumers that eat these plants. Can you think of an example?
Student 2: Rabbits eat grass!
Teacher: Good! What else?
Student 3: Deer also eat plants.
Student 1: Insects too, like grasshoppers.
Teacher: Excellent examples! Now, what would happen if all the rabbits disappeared from our ecosystem? Think about this for a moment and discuss with your neighbor.
[Group Discussion]
Student 4: We think the foxes would have less food and their population would go down too.
Teacher: That's a great observation, James! You're thinking about the ripple effects through the food web. What else might happen?
Student 2: Maybe there would be more grass since nothing is eating it?
Teacher: Yes! This is called a trophic cascade. When one species is removed, it affects multiple levels of the ecosystem.
Teacher: Now I want you to work in groups of three. Create your own food web using the worksheet I'm handing out. You have about 10 minutes.
[Group Work]
Teacher: I see some great webs being created. Remember to include at least three producers and five consumers.
Student 5: Teacher, can we include decomposers too?
Teacher: Absolutely! Decomposers are an important part of the ecosystem. They help recycle nutrients back into the soil. Great thinking, Sofia!
Teacher: Alright, let's wrap up. What's one new thing you learned today about food webs?
Student 3: That when one animal disappears, it affects the whole system.
Teacher: Perfect summary! See you all tomorrow.